The Political Economy of Economic Policy - IMF F&D 
The IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists. 
 
JEFFRY FRIEDEN 
 
June 2020 
 
Download PDF 
 
We should pay closer attention to the interactions between politics, economics, and other realms 
 
The COVID-19 pandemic strikingly illustrates the intersection of politics,
economics, and other considerations. Public health experts have long warned
that the world was likely to face a major pandemic and called for greater
preparedness. Yet policymakers who have to focus on the next election find
it difficult to invest the time, money, and political capital to address
the abstract possibility of a future crisis. And so most of the world was
unprepared for a global public health threat of the magnitude posed by the
novel coronavirus. 
 
As the pandemic has raced across the world, the policy response has
continued to be tempered by political realities. Some members of the
public, and some policymakers, have resisted the recommendations of public
health experts, hoping for relaxed restrictions and a return to normalcy
before the dangers have passed. At the same time, business interests have
pressed for exceptions to benefit themselves, and for substantial
subsidies—bailouts—to help them through difficult times. 
 
At the international level, government responses to the pandemic illustrate
the difficult politics of worldwide cooperation. A global pandemic requires
a global response: microbes do not respect borders. A coordinated
international response is clearly the best way to confront an international
public health emergency. Yet policymakers under pressure from their
constituents have diverted resources away from other countries, banned the
export of food and drugs, and hoarded essential supplies. Each of these
measures—popular as they may be to national publics—imposes costs on other
countries. In the final analysis, the lack of cooperation makes everyone
worse off. Such international institutions as theWorld Health Organizationattempt to coordinate a cooperative global response to the global
crisis—but they can be powerless in the face of potent nationalist
political pressures (see, for example, Goodman and others 2010). 
 
Every government faces tough decisions about the appropriate measures: what
restrictions to impose and when to loosen them, where money will be spent
and how it will be raised, and what national concerns can be limited to
favor international cooperation. These decisions have to take into account
public health recommendations, economic considerations, and political
constraints. Just as the policy response to the 2007–08 financial crisis
varied from country to country in line with local political economy
conditions, so national policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic vary for
health, economic, and political reasons. 
 
This hotly contested policy response to a universal threat is no surprise
to political economists. It happens all the time. For example, just about
every economist believes that small countries would be better off if they
removed all barriers to trade. Yet unilateral free trade is practically
unheard of, and no country in the world today pursues it. Why not? More
generally, why do governments have so much trouble getting economic
policies right? Why does the advice of independent observers, analysts, and
scholars go so often unheeded? 
 
Politicsis the usual answer, and the answer is usually right. But that is too
vague—like saying that some countries are rich and others poor due to
economics. Exactly how does politics keep governments from making better
policy, even in the face of imminent crises? What does that tell us about
how economic policy can and should be made? 
 
Political economyis about how politics affects the economy and the economy affects politics
(see box). Governments try to pump up the economy before elections, so that
so-called political business cycles create ebbs and flows of economic
activity around elections. By the same token, economic conditions have a
powerful impact on elections. Political economists have uncovered the
simple (perhaps disturbing) fact that the rates of economic growth and
inflation are all the information we need to predict quite accurately the
results of the past 100 years of US presidential elections (see, for
example, Fair 2018). So why don’t elections work to push politicians to
choose the best policies? 
 
Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill are widely regarded as the
originators of modern economics. But they called themselvespolitical economists, and Mill’sPrinciples of Political Economywas the fundamental text of the
discipline from its publication in 1848 until the end of the century. These
early theorists could not conceive of the economic and political worlds as
separate. 
 
Two trends divided the political from the economic analysis. First,
governments began to reduce their direct control over the economy. Second,
different political forms emerged: Europe went from almost exclusively
monarchical to increasingly representative, and highly varied, forms of
government. By the early 20th century economics and political science were
established as separate disciplines. 
 
For much of the 20th century this division reigned. With the Great
Depression and problems of development, the purely economic issues were
daunting enough to occupy economists. By the same token, the political
problems of the era—two world wars, the rise of fascism and communism—were
so serious as to require separate attention. 
 
By the 1970s, however, it was clear that the separation between the
economic and political spheres was misleading. That decade saw the collapse
of the Bretton Woods monetary order, two oil price shocks, and
stagflation—all highlighting the fact that economic and political matters
are intertwined. The economy was now high politics, and much of politics
was about the economy. 
 
Over the past 50 years, political economy has become increasingly prominent
in both economics and political science, in three ways: 
 
It analyzes how political forces affect the economy.Voters and interest groups have a powerful impact on virtually every
possible economic policy. Political economists strive to identify the
relevant groups and their interests, and how political institutions affect
their impact on policy. 
 
It assesses how the economy affects politics.Macroeconomic trends can boost or ruin an incumbent’s chances. At the more
microeconomic level, features of the economic organization or activities of
particular firms or industries can have an impact on the nature and
direction of their political activity. 
 
It uses the tools of economics to study politics.Politicians can be thought of as analogous to firms, with voters as
consumers, or governments as monopoly providers of goods and services to
constituent customers. Scholars model political-economic interactions in
order to develop a more theoretically rigorous understanding of the
underlying features driving politics. 
 
All three methods have profoundly affected both scholars and policymakers.
And political economy has a lot to offer both to analysts of how societies
work and to those who would like to change society. 
 
A basic economic principle is that any policy that is good for society as a
whole can be made to be good for everyone in society, even if the policy
creates winners and losers. It requires only that the winners be taxed just
a bit to compensate the losers—and everyone is better off. Economists use
powerful tools to clarify which economic policies are best for society. So
why should economic policy be controversial? 
 
A basicpolitical economyprinciple is that the winners don’t like
being taxed to compensate losers. And the battle is joined, not over what
is best for society but rather over who will be the winners and losers.
What is best for the country may not be best for my region, or group, or
industry, or class—and so I will fight it. 
 
Even in democracies, plenty of citizens might agree that politics obeys the
golden rule: those with the gold make the rules. Special-interest groups do
seem to play an outsize role around the world, democratic or not. These
include wealthy individuals, powerful industries, big banks and
corporations, and formidable labor unions. 
 
How else to explain why Americans pay two or three times the world price
for sugar? There are a handful of sugarcane plantations and a few thousand
sugar beet farmers in the United States—and 330 million sugar consumers.
You’d think that the 330 million would count for a lot more in politics
than the several thousand, but you’d be wrong. For decades, subsidies and
trade barriers have raised the price of sugar to the benefit of the sugar
planters and farmers and to the detriment of everyone else. 
 
Why does a tiny group of sugar producers matter more than the rest of the
country? A commonplace of political economy is thatconcentratedinterests usually win overdiffuseinterests. The sugar producers
are well organized and work hard to influence politicians. If they didn’t
get favorable government treatment they’d go out of business, so it’s
important for them to organize to lobby and fund politicians. The cost to
consumers is estimated at $2 billion to $3 billion a year. That’s a lot of
money—but it comes to a couple of cents a day for the average American. No
consumer is going to talk to an elected representative or threaten to vote
for an opponent over a couple of cents a day. 
 
The fact that producers are concentrated while consumers are diffuse helps
explain trade protection. A few automobile manufacturers can organize
themselves; tens of millions of car buyers can’t. That’s not all.
Management and labor in the auto industry may not agree on much, but
automakers and autoworkers agree that they want to be protected from
foreign competition. Politicians—especially politicians from areas where
automobile manufacturing is important—have a hard time denying a common
demand of workers and owners in a powerful industry. 
 
Perhaps this is not such a bad thing. Sugar farmers and autoworkers depend
for their livelihood on supportive policies. Who is to say that their jobs
are less important than lower prices for consumers? There is no simple,
widely accepted way to balance the benefits against the costs—is cheaper
sugar important enough to bankrupt thousands of hardworking farmers?
Politics is, in fact, the way society adjudicates among conflicting
interests, and maybe those with more at stake should have a bigger say. 
 
Political economists don’t usually take stands on complicated moral and
ethical issues of this sort. They try to understandwhysocieties
choose to do what they do. The fact that sugar or car producers have much
more at stake and are much better organized than sugar or car consumers
helps explain why government policies favor sugar and car producers over
consumers. 
 
Some consumers are concentrated, though. Sugar is sweet, and the
corporations of the Sweetener Users Association want it to be cheap as
well. Coca-Cola, Hershey, and the like have pushed hard to change American
sugar policy. The fact that there are powerful concentrated interests on
both sides of the issue helps explain why prices aren’t even higher than
they are. The same thing is true of industrial products. Steelmakers want
protection; steel users—like the auto manufacturers—don’t. Trade policy is not just a battle between big corporations and
disunited households; it’s also a battleamongbig corporations.
Otherwise we’d expect every industry to be protected and trade to be
tightly limited everywhere. 
 
In fact, there are plenty of powerful interests infavorof
international trade and investment. The world’s multinational corporations
and international banks depend on an open flow of goods and capital. This
is especially the case today, when many of the world’s largest companies
depend on complex global supply chains. A typical international corporation
today produces parts and components in dozens of countries, assembles them
in dozens more, and sells the final products everywhere. Trade barriers
interfere with these supply chains, which is why most of the world’s
biggest companies are also some of the biggest supporters of freer trade. 
 
In this 15-minute video, Prof. Jeffry Frieden responds to reader questions from around the world on political economy 
 
Special interests as well as voters on different sides of every issue fight
their battles in the political arena. But the rules of politics vary a lot
from country to country. The way a political economy is organized affects
who wins the battle over policy. 
 
A logical starting point is elections, at least in democracies. Governments
that don’t satisfy their constituents don’t remain governments very long.
So we might expect democracies to choose policies that benefit the economy
as a whole. However, the economy as a whole doesn’t vote. 
 
Politicians need votes from the people who decide elections. The decisive
or pivotal voters vary with a country’s electoral institutions and social
divisions. In most political systems, the best targets are swing voters,
who might change their vote in response to the policies of an incumbent or
the promises of a challenger. If the poor vote for the left and the rich
vote for the right, for example, the middle class could be decisive. In
recent American presidential elections, the most important swing voters
have been in distressed industrial regions of the Midwest. Many voters in
these areas believe that foreign competition contributed to manufacturing
decline. This helps explain why presidential candidates have become
increasingly protectionist, even though most Americans support openness to
trade. 
 
In addition, policymakers in democratic societies must always pay attention
to the next election—otherwise they are likely to cease being policymakers.
This helps explain why it can be difficult for governments to pay money now
for policies whose benefits will be realized only in the long run—such as
pandemic prevention and preparedness. 
 
The mass of special and general interests in society is overwhelming.Institutionshelp make sense of them. First aresocial institutions—the way people organize themselves. Some
businesses, farmers, and workers are well organized, giving them more
political clout. Farmers in rich countries are relatively few, are well
organized, and are almost universally subsidized and protected. Farmers in
poor countries are many, rarely organized, and almost universally taxed.
Where workers are grouped into centralized labor federations, as in some
northern European countries, they play a major role in national
policymaking. The ways in which societies organize themselves—by economic
sector, region, ethnicity—affect how they structure their politics. 
 
Political institutionsmediate the pressures constituents bring to bear on leaders. Even in
authoritarian countries, rulers have to pay attention to at least some part
of public opinion. Political economists call this the “selectorate,” that
portion of the population that matters to policymakers. In an authoritarian
regime, this could be an economic elite or the armed forces. In an
electoral democracy it would be voters and interest groups. No matter who
matters, policymakers need their support to stay in office. 
 
In democracies, the variety ofelectoral institutionsaffects how
policymakers feel constituent pressures. Organized political parties can
help extend the time horizons of politicians: while an individual
politician may worry only about the next election, a party has to be
concerned about its longer-term reputation. On another dimension, where
politicians are elected by the country as a whole, as in Israel or the
Netherlands, the focus is on national policy. Where politicians represent
narrower geographic locations, as in the US House of Representatives, the
general view is that “all politics is local” (usually attributed to
1970s–80s Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill). These different
electoral systems can drive politics toward more national or more local
concerns. 
 
Electoral institutions affect the identity of the people politicians need
to attract to win an election. The US Electoral College makes
middle-of-the-road voters in the Midwestern industrial states pivotal in
presidential elections, driving the emphasis on protection for
manufacturing. In a multiparty parliamentary system, the pivotal voters may
be the supporters of a small party that can swing back and forth between
coalition partners, such as the fringe parties for the formation of Israeli
governments. Whichever voters the electoral system makes pivotal are likely
to have outsize influence over politics and policy. 
 
The character of legislative institutionsalso matters. For
example, while a unitary parliamentary system can deliver big and fast
change, in the US separation of powers system change is more modest and
slower. Federal systems—in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, the United
States—give provincial or state governments a lot of power, while
centralized systems allow the national government to rule unchallenged.
Some governments have handed off control of important policies to
independent bodies that are less subject to day-to-day political
pressures—such as central banks and public health agencies. 
 
These institutions matter because they affect the weights that politicians
give to different groups in society. Some sociopolitical institutions give
labor unions a great deal of influence; others privilege farmers; still
others are dominated by business associations. Political economists analyze
the interests in play and how the institutions of society transmit and
transform them into government policy. 
 
All this matters to policymakers or observers or even just people who care
about the economy because it can profoundly change the way we think about
policy and policy advice. 
 
The policy that economic analysis indicates is best for the economy may not
be politically feasible. To go back to free trade, virtually all economists
would recommend that a small country’s best bet is to remove all trade
barriers unilaterally. Yet it is almost certain that a government that
attempted to move to unilateral free trade would face massive opposition
from special interests and from many in the public who would regard such a
move as dangerous. The result might well be the collapse of the government
and its replacement with one that could be relied on to maintain and even
expand trade barriers. In this case, pursuit of the first-best policy could
lead to a much worse outcome. 
 
Politicians, analysts, observers, and just regular people who are
interested in economic policy are well advised to evaluate not only the
economic implications of policy initiatives but also their political
feasibility. If the pursuit of a first-best policy is bound to fail and
perhaps provoke a backlash, then truly the cure may be worse than the
disease. It makes more sense to consider the political realities the
government faces and to structure policy with those realities in mind. It
is better to settle for second-best than to insist on first-best and end up
worse—or, as folk wisdom has it, to let the perfect be the enemy of the
good. 
 
Political economy is the integration of political and economic factors in
our analysis of modern society. Inasmuch as just about everyone would agree
that politics and economics are intricately and irretrievably
interwoven—politics affects the economy and the economy affects
politics—this approach seems natural. It has proved itself powerful inunderstandinggovernments and societies; it can also be a powerful
tool for those interested inchanginggovernments and societies.
Policymakers should hold these important lessons in mind today as they
tackle the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
JEFFRY FRIEDENis Professor of Government at Harvard University 
 
Opinions expressed in articles and other materials are those of the authors; they do not necessarily reflect IMF policy. 
 
Fair, Ray C. 2018. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations:
November 2018 Update.” Yale Department of Economics Paper, Yale University,
New Haven, CT. 
 
Goodman, Peter S., Katie Thomas, Sui-Lee Wee, and Jeffrey Gettleman. 2010.
“A New Front for Nationalism: The Global Battle against a Virus.”New York Times, April 10. 
 
© International Monetary Fund. All rights reserved. 
 
Finance & Development 
 
The Political Economy of Economic Policy 
 
FACTSHEETS 
 
RESOURCES 
 
TOPICS 
 
Flagship Publications 
 
Other Publications 
 
IMF reports and publications by country 
 
Regional Offices 
 
All News 
 
See Also 
 
For Journalists 
 
RESOURCES 
 
FLAGSHIPS 
 
KEY SERIES 
 
IMF NOTES 
 
Related Features 
 
You might also like 
 
Press Center 
 
Latest Issues 
 
Politics at play 
 
What Is Political Economy? 
 
Where you stand depends on where you sit 
 
A complex web 
 
Second-best can be best 
 
Bottom line 
 
References: 
 
March 2024 
 
December 2023 
 
September 2023 
 
June 2023 
 
About Us 
 
Social Media 
 
F&D STAFF 
 
AboutFACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICSIMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll Topics 
 
FACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICSIMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll Topics 
 
FACTSHEETS 
 
RESOURCES 
 
TOPICS 
 
IMF at a Glance 
 
Surveillance 
 
Lending 
 
Capacity Development 
 
IMF Factsheets List 
 
IMF Members 
 
IMF Timeline 
 
Senior Officials 
 
Job Opportunities 
 
Archives of the IMF 
 
Climate Change 
 
Fintech 
 
Fiscal Policies 
 
Income Inequality 
 
All Topics 
 
ResearchFlagship PublicationsOther PublicationsWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF Events 
 
Flagship PublicationsOther PublicationsWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF Events 
 
Flagship Publications 
 
Other Publications 
 
World Economic Outlook 
 
Global Financial Stability Report 
 
Fiscal Monitor 
 
External Sector Report 
 
Staff Discussion Notes 
 
Working Papers 
 
IMF Research Perspectives 
 
Economic Review 
 
Global Housing Watch 
 
Commodity Prices 
 
Commodities Data Portal 
 
IMF Researchers 
 
Annual Research Conference 
 
Other IMF Events 
 
CountriesIMF reports and publications by countryRegional OfficesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific Islands 
 
IMF reports and publications by countryRegional OfficesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific Islands 
 
IMF reports and publications by country 
 
Regional Offices 
 
A 
 
B 
 
C 
 
D 
 
E 
 
F 
 
G 
 
H 
 
I 
 
J 
 
K 
 
L 
 
M 
 
N 
 
O 
 
P 
 
Q 
 
R 
 
S 
 
T 
 
U 
 
V 
 
Y 
 
Z 
 
IMF Resident Representative Offices 
 
IMF Regional Reports 
 
IMF and Europe 
 
IMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of Governors 
 
IMF Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific 
 
IMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT) 
 
IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic 
 
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) 
 
IMF Europe Office in Paris and Brussels 
 
IMF Office in the Pacific Islands 
 
Capacity DevelopmentAbout UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and Policies 
 
About UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and Policies 
 
About Us 
 
What We Do 
 
How We Work 
 
IMF Training 
 
Digital Training Catalog 
 
Online Learning 
 
Our Partners 
 
Country Stories 
 
Technical Assistance Reports 
 
High-Level Summary Technical Assistance Reports 
 
Strategy and Policies 
 
NewsAll NewsSee AlsoFor JournalistsCountry FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interest 
 
All NewsSee AlsoFor JournalistsCountry FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interest 
 
All News 
 
See Also 
 
For Journalists 
 
Country Focus 
 
Chart of the Week 
 
Communiqués 
 
Mission Concluding Statements 
 
Press Releases 
 
Speeches 
 
Statements at Donor Meetings 
 
Transcripts 
 
Views & Commentaries 
 
IMFBlog 
 
Article IV Consultations 
 
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) 
 
Seminars, Conferences, & Other Events 
 
E-mail Notification 
 
Press CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists. 
 
LoginorRegister 
 
Information of interest 
 
VideosAbout the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost Popular 
 
About the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost Popular 
 
About the IMF 
 
Conferences 
 
Press briefings 
 
Speeches 
 
Special Features 
 
Africa 
 
Americas 
 
Asia 
 
Europe 
 
Middle East and Central Asia 
 
Economic Outlook 
 
Annual and spring meetings 
 
Capacity Development 
 
Most Recent 
 
Most Popular 
 
DataIMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance Statistics 
 
IMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance Statistics 
 
IMF Finances 
 
Additional Data Sources 
 
World Economic Outlook Databases 
 
Climate Change Indicators Dashboard 
 
IMF eLibrary-Data 
 
International Financial Statistics 
 
G20 Data Gaps Initiative 
 
Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves 
 
Financial Access Survey 
 
Government Finance Statistics 
 
PublicationsRESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTESPublications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate Notes 
 
RESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTESPublications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate Notes 
 
RESOURCES 
 
FLAGSHIPS 
 
KEY SERIES 
 
IMF NOTES 
 
Publications Advanced Search 
 
IMF eLibrary 
 
IMF Bookstore 
 
Publications Newsletter 
 
Essential Reading Guides 
 
World Economic Outlook 
 
Global Financial Stability Report 
 
Fiscal Monitor 
 
External Sector Report 
 
Regional Economic Reports 
 
Country Reports 
 
Departmental Papers 
 
Policy Papers 
 
Staff Discussion Notes 
 
Selected Issues Papers 
 
All Staff Notes Series 
 
Analytical Notes 
 
Fintech Notes 
 
How-To Notes 
 
Staff Climate Notes 
 
March of the Models 
 
The Social Costs of Price 
 
A Place for Politics 
 
Gillian Tett on Anthropology for the Modern Economist 
 
A Road Well Traveled 
 
Revisiting the Soviet Breakup 
 
F&D HOMEPAGE 
 
About F&D Magazine 
 
Contact Us 
 
F&D on Facebook 
 
F&D on LinkedIn 
 
Gita Bhatt, Editor-In-Chief 
 
Maureen Burke,  Managing Editor 
 
Peter J. Walker, Senior Editor 
 
Jeff Kearns, Senior Editor 
 
Nicholas Owen, Senior Editor 
 
Smita Aggarwal, Assistant Editor 
 
Andrew Stanley, Assistant Editor 
 
Bruce Edwards, Multimedia Content 
 
Noha Elbadawy, Multimedia content 
 
Melinda Weir,  Production Manager 
 
Rekia Ennaboulssi, Web Manager 
 
Marta Doroszczyk, Digital Marketing 
 
Kwabena Akuamoah-Boateng, Social Media Editor 
 
About 
 
Research 
 
Countries 
 
Capacity Development 
 
News 
 
Events 
 
Videos 
 
Data 
 
Publications 
 
Social Media Hub 
 
Annual Report 
 
Copyright and Usage 
 
Privacy Policy 
 
Contact Us 
 
Careers 
 
Glossary 
 
Scam Alert 
 
IMF Brand 
 
عربي 
 
中文 
 
Français 
 
日本語 
 
Русский 
 
Español 
 
AboutFACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICSIMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll TopicsResearchFlagship PublicationsOther PublicationsWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF EventsCountriesIMF reports and publications by countryRegional OfficesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific IslandsCapacity DevelopmentAbout UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and PoliciesNewsAll NewsSee AlsoFor JournalistsCountry FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interestVideosAbout the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost PopularDataIMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance StatisticsPublicationsRESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTESPublications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate NotesFinance & DevelopmentThe Political Economy of Economic PolicyJEFFRY FRIEDENJune 2020Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文5 min(1403 words)ReadDownload PDFWe should pay closer attention to the interactions between politics, economics, and other realmsThe COVID-19 pandemic strikingly illustrates the intersection of politics,
economics, and other considerations. Public health experts have long warned
that the world was likely to face a major pandemic and called for greater
preparedness. Yet policymakers who have to focus on the next election find
it difficult to invest the time, money, and political capital to address
the abstract possibility of a future crisis. And so most of the world was
unprepared for a global public health threat of the magnitude posed by the
novel coronavirus.As the pandemic has raced across the world, the policy response has
continued to be tempered by political realities. Some members of the
public, and some policymakers, have resisted the recommendations of public
health experts, hoping for relaxed restrictions and a return to normalcy
before the dangers have passed. At the same time, business interests have
pressed for exceptions to benefit themselves, and for substantial
subsidies—bailouts—to help them through difficult times.At the international level, government responses to the pandemic illustrate
the difficult politics of worldwide cooperation. A global pandemic requires
a global response: microbes do not respect borders. A coordinated
international response is clearly the best way to confront an international
public health emergency. Yet policymakers under pressure from their
constituents have diverted resources away from other countries, banned the
export of food and drugs, and hoarded essential supplies. Each of these
measures—popular as they may be to national publics—imposes costs on other
countries. In the final analysis, the lack of cooperation makes everyone
worse off. Such international institutions as theWorld Health Organizationattempt to coordinate a cooperative global response to the global
crisis—but they can be powerless in the face of potent nationalist
political pressures (see, for example, Goodman and others 2010).Every government faces tough decisions about the appropriate measures: what
restrictions to impose and when to loosen them, where money will be spent
and how it will be raised, and what national concerns can be limited to
favor international cooperation. These decisions have to take into account
public health recommendations, economic considerations, and political
constraints. Just as the policy response to the 2007–08 financial crisis
varied from country to country in line with local political economy
conditions, so national policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic vary for
health, economic, and political reasons.Politics at playThis hotly contested policy response to a universal threat is no surprise
to political economists. It happens all the time. For example, just about
every economist believes that small countries would be better off if they
removed all barriers to trade. Yet unilateral free trade is practically
unheard of, and no country in the world today pursues it. Why not? More
generally, why do governments have so much trouble getting economic
policies right? Why does the advice of independent observers, analysts, and
scholars go so often unheeded?Politicsis the usual answer, and the answer is usually right. But that is too
vague—like saying that some countries are rich and others poor due to
economics. Exactly how does politics keep governments from making better
policy, even in the face of imminent crises? What does that tell us about
how economic policy can and should be made?Political economyis about how politics affects the economy and the economy affects politics
(see box). Governments try to pump up the economy before elections, so that
so-called political business cycles create ebbs and flows of economic
activity around elections. By the same token, economic conditions have a
powerful impact on elections. Political economists have uncovered the
simple (perhaps disturbing) fact that the rates of economic growth and
inflation are all the information we need to predict quite accurately the
results of the past 100 years of US presidential elections (see, for
example, Fair 2018). So why don’t elections work to push politicians to
choose the best policies?What Is Political Economy?Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill are widely regarded as the
originators of modern economics. But they called themselvespolitical economists, and Mill’sPrinciples of Political Economywas the fundamental text of the
discipline from its publication in 1848 until the end of the century. These
early theorists could not conceive of the economic and political worlds as
separate.Two trends divided the political from the economic analysis. First,
governments began to reduce their direct control over the economy. Second,
different political forms emerged: Europe went from almost exclusively
monarchical to increasingly representative, and highly varied, forms of
government. By the early 20th century economics and political science were
established as separate disciplines.For much of the 20th century this division reigned. With the Great
Depression and problems of development, the purely economic issues were
daunting enough to occupy economists. By the same token, the political
problems of the era—two world wars, the rise of fascism and communism—were
so serious as to require separate attention.By the 1970s, however, it was clear that the separation between the
economic and political spheres was misleading. That decade saw the collapse
of the Bretton Woods monetary order, two oil price shocks, and
stagflation—all highlighting the fact that economic and political matters
are intertwined. The economy was now high politics, and much of politics
was about the economy.Over the past 50 years, political economy has become increasingly prominent
in both economics and political science, in three ways:It analyzes how political forces affect the economy.Voters and interest groups have a powerful impact on virtually every
possible economic policy. Political economists strive to identify the
relevant groups and their interests, and how political institutions affect
their impact on policy.It assesses how the economy affects politics.Macroeconomic trends can boost or ruin an incumbent’s chances. At the more
microeconomic level, features of the economic organization or activities of
particular firms or industries can have an impact on the nature and
direction of their political activity.It uses the tools of economics to study politics.Politicians can be thought of as analogous to firms, with voters as
consumers, or governments as monopoly providers of goods and services to
constituent customers. Scholars model political-economic interactions in
order to develop a more theoretically rigorous understanding of the
underlying features driving politics.All three methods have profoundly affected both scholars and policymakers.
And political economy has a lot to offer both to analysts of how societies
work and to those who would like to change society.Where you stand depends on where you sitA basic economic principle is that any policy that is good for society as a
whole can be made to be good for everyone in society, even if the policy
creates winners and losers. It requires only that the winners be taxed just
a bit to compensate the losers—and everyone is better off. Economists use
powerful tools to clarify which economic policies are best for society. So
why should economic policy be controversial?A basicpolitical economyprinciple is that the winners don’t like
being taxed to compensate losers. And the battle is joined, not over what
is best for society but rather over who will be the winners and losers.
What is best for the country may not be best for my region, or group, or
industry, or class—and so I will fight it.Even in democracies, plenty of citizens might agree that politics obeys the
golden rule: those with the gold make the rules. Special-interest groups do
seem to play an outsize role around the world, democratic or not. These
include wealthy individuals, powerful industries, big banks and
corporations, and formidable labor unions.How else to explain why Americans pay two or three times the world price
for sugar? There are a handful of sugarcane plantations and a few thousand
sugar beet farmers in the United States—and 330 million sugar consumers.
You’d think that the 330 million would count for a lot more in politics
than the several thousand, but you’d be wrong. For decades, subsidies and
trade barriers have raised the price of sugar to the benefit of the sugar
planters and farmers and to the detriment of everyone else.Why does a tiny group of sugar producers matter more than the rest of the
country? A commonplace of political economy is thatconcentratedinterests usually win overdiffuseinterests. The sugar producers
are well organized and work hard to influence politicians. If they didn’t
get favorable government treatment they’d go out of business, so it’s
important for them to organize to lobby and fund politicians. The cost to
consumers is estimated at $2 billion to $3 billion a year. That’s a lot of
money—but it comes to a couple of cents a day for the average American. No
consumer is going to talk to an elected representative or threaten to vote
for an opponent over a couple of cents a day.The fact that producers are concentrated while consumers are diffuse helps
explain trade protection. A few automobile manufacturers can organize
themselves; tens of millions of car buyers can’t. That’s not all.
Management and labor in the auto industry may not agree on much, but
automakers and autoworkers agree that they want to be protected from
foreign competition. Politicians—especially politicians from areas where
automobile manufacturing is important—have a hard time denying a common
demand of workers and owners in a powerful industry.Perhaps this is not such a bad thing. Sugar farmers and autoworkers depend
for their livelihood on supportive policies. Who is to say that their jobs
are less important than lower prices for consumers? There is no simple,
widely accepted way to balance the benefits against the costs—is cheaper
sugar important enough to bankrupt thousands of hardworking farmers?
Politics is, in fact, the way society adjudicates among conflicting
interests, and maybe those with more at stake should have a bigger say.Political economists don’t usually take stands on complicated moral and
ethical issues of this sort. They try to understandwhysocieties
choose to do what they do. The fact that sugar or car producers have much
more at stake and are much better organized than sugar or car consumers
helps explain why government policies favor sugar and car producers over
consumers.Some consumers are concentrated, though. Sugar is sweet, and the
corporations of the Sweetener Users Association want it to be cheap as
well. Coca-Cola, Hershey, and the like have pushed hard to change American
sugar policy. The fact that there are powerful concentrated interests on
both sides of the issue helps explain why prices aren’t even higher than
they are. The same thing is true of industrial products. Steelmakers want
protection; steel users—like the auto manufacturers—don’t. Trade policy is not just a battle between big corporations and
disunited households; it’s also a battleamongbig corporations.
Otherwise we’d expect every industry to be protected and trade to be
tightly limited everywhere.In fact, there are plenty of powerful interests infavorof
international trade and investment. The world’s multinational corporations
and international banks depend on an open flow of goods and capital. This
is especially the case today, when many of the world’s largest companies
depend on complex global supply chains. A typical international corporation
today produces parts and components in dozens of countries, assembles them
in dozens more, and sells the final products everywhere. Trade barriers
interfere with these supply chains, which is why most of the world’s
biggest companies are also some of the biggest supporters of freer trade.In this 15-minute video, Prof. Jeffry Frieden responds to reader questions from around the world on political economyA complex webSpecial interests as well as voters on different sides of every issue fight
their battles in the political arena. But the rules of politics vary a lot
from country to country. The way a political economy is organized affects
who wins the battle over policy.A logical starting point is elections, at least in democracies. Governments
that don’t satisfy their constituents don’t remain governments very long.
So we might expect democracies to choose policies that benefit the economy
as a whole. However, the economy as a whole doesn’t vote.Politicians need votes from the people who decide elections. The decisive
or pivotal voters vary with a country’s electoral institutions and social
divisions. In most political systems, the best targets are swing voters,
who might change their vote in response to the policies of an incumbent or
the promises of a challenger. If the poor vote for the left and the rich
vote for the right, for example, the middle class could be decisive. In
recent American presidential elections, the most important swing voters
have been in distressed industrial regions of the Midwest. Many voters in
these areas believe that foreign competition contributed to manufacturing
decline. This helps explain why presidential candidates have become
increasingly protectionist, even though most Americans support openness to
trade.In addition, policymakers in democratic societies must always pay attention
to the next election—otherwise they are likely to cease being policymakers.
This helps explain why it can be difficult for governments to pay money now
for policies whose benefits will be realized only in the long run—such as
pandemic prevention and preparedness.The mass of special and general interests in society is overwhelming.Institutionshelp make sense of them. First aresocial institutions—the way people organize themselves. Some
businesses, farmers, and workers are well organized, giving them more
political clout. Farmers in rich countries are relatively few, are well
organized, and are almost universally subsidized and protected. Farmers in
poor countries are many, rarely organized, and almost universally taxed.
Where workers are grouped into centralized labor federations, as in some
northern European countries, they play a major role in national
policymaking. The ways in which societies organize themselves—by economic
sector, region, ethnicity—affect how they structure their politics.Political institutionsmediate the pressures constituents bring to bear on leaders. Even in
authoritarian countries, rulers have to pay attention to at least some part
of public opinion. Political economists call this the “selectorate,” that
portion of the population that matters to policymakers. In an authoritarian
regime, this could be an economic elite or the armed forces. In an
electoral democracy it would be voters and interest groups. No matter who
matters, policymakers need their support to stay in office.In democracies, the variety ofelectoral institutionsaffects how
policymakers feel constituent pressures. Organized political parties can
help extend the time horizons of politicians: while an individual
politician may worry only about the next election, a party has to be
concerned about its longer-term reputation. On another dimension, where
politicians are elected by the country as a whole, as in Israel or the
Netherlands, the focus is on national policy. Where politicians represent
narrower geographic locations, as in the US House of Representatives, the
general view is that “all politics is local” (usually attributed to
1970s–80s Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill). These different
electoral systems can drive politics toward more national or more local
concerns.Electoral institutions affect the identity of the people politicians need
to attract to win an election. The US Electoral College makes
middle-of-the-road voters in the Midwestern industrial states pivotal in
presidential elections, driving the emphasis on protection for
manufacturing. In a multiparty parliamentary system, the pivotal voters may
be the supporters of a small party that can swing back and forth between
coalition partners, such as the fringe parties for the formation of Israeli
governments. Whichever voters the electoral system makes pivotal are likely
to have outsize influence over politics and policy.The character of legislative institutionsalso matters. For
example, while a unitary parliamentary system can deliver big and fast
change, in the US separation of powers system change is more modest and
slower. Federal systems—in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, the United
States—give provincial or state governments a lot of power, while
centralized systems allow the national government to rule unchallenged.
Some governments have handed off control of important policies to
independent bodies that are less subject to day-to-day political
pressures—such as central banks and public health agencies.These institutions matter because they affect the weights that politicians
give to different groups in society. Some sociopolitical institutions give
labor unions a great deal of influence; others privilege farmers; still
others are dominated by business associations. Political economists analyze
the interests in play and how the institutions of society transmit and
transform them into government policy.Second-best can be bestAll this matters to policymakers or observers or even just people who care
about the economy because it can profoundly change the way we think about
policy and policy advice.The policy that economic analysis indicates is best for the economy may not
be politically feasible. To go back to free trade, virtually all economists
would recommend that a small country’s best bet is to remove all trade
barriers unilaterally. Yet it is almost certain that a government that
attempted to move to unilateral free trade would face massive opposition
from special interests and from many in the public who would regard such a
move as dangerous. The result might well be the collapse of the government
and its replacement with one that could be relied on to maintain and even
expand trade barriers. In this case, pursuit of the first-best policy could
lead to a much worse outcome.Politicians, analysts, observers, and just regular people who are
interested in economic policy are well advised to evaluate not only the
economic implications of policy initiatives but also their political
feasibility. If the pursuit of a first-best policy is bound to fail and
perhaps provoke a backlash, then truly the cure may be worse than the
disease. It makes more sense to consider the political realities the
government faces and to structure policy with those realities in mind. It
is better to settle for second-best than to insist on first-best and end up
worse—or, as folk wisdom has it, to let the perfect be the enemy of the
good.Bottom linePolitical economy is the integration of political and economic factors in
our analysis of modern society. Inasmuch as just about everyone would agree
that politics and economics are intricately and irretrievably
interwoven—politics affects the economy and the economy affects
politics—this approach seems natural. It has proved itself powerful inunderstandinggovernments and societies; it can also be a powerful
tool for those interested inchanginggovernments and societies.
Policymakers should hold these important lessons in mind today as they
tackle the COVID-19 pandemic.JEFFRY FRIEDENis Professor of Government at Harvard UniversityOpinions expressed in articles and other materials are those of the authors; they do not necessarily reflect IMF policy.References:Fair, Ray C. 2018. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations:
November 2018 Update.” Yale Department of Economics Paper, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.Goodman, Peter S., Katie Thomas, Sui-Lee Wee, and Jeffrey Gettleman. 2010.
“A New Front for Nationalism: The Global Battle against a Virus.”New York Times, April 10.Related FeaturesYou might also likeMarch of the ModelsThe Social Costs of PriceA Place for PoliticsGillian Tett on Anthropology for the Modern EconomistA Road Well TraveledRevisiting the Soviet BreakupF&D HOMEPAGELatest IssuesMarch 2024Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文December 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文September 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文June 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文MoreAbout UsAbout F&D MagazineContact UsSocial MediaF&D on FacebookF&D on LinkedInF&D STAFFGita Bhatt, Editor-In-ChiefMaureen Burke,  Managing EditorPeter J. Walker, Senior EditorJeff Kearns, Senior EditorNicholas Owen, Senior EditorSmita Aggarwal, Assistant EditorAndrew Stanley, Assistant EditorBruce Edwards, Multimedia ContentNoha Elbadawy, Multimedia contentMelinda Weir,  Production ManagerRekia Ennaboulssi, Web ManagerMarta Doroszczyk, Digital MarketingKwabena Akuamoah-Boateng, Social Media Editor 
 
AboutFACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICSIMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll TopicsResearchFlagship PublicationsOther PublicationsWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF EventsCountriesIMF reports and publications by countryRegional OfficesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific IslandsCapacity DevelopmentAbout UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and PoliciesNewsAll NewsSee AlsoFor JournalistsCountry FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interestVideosAbout the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost PopularDataIMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance StatisticsPublicationsRESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTESPublications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate Notes 
 
AboutFACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICSIMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll TopicsResearchFlagship PublicationsOther PublicationsWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF EventsCountriesIMF reports and publications by countryRegional OfficesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific IslandsCapacity DevelopmentAbout UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and PoliciesNewsAll NewsSee AlsoFor JournalistsCountry FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interestVideosAbout the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost PopularDataIMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance StatisticsPublicationsRESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTESPublications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate Notes 
 
AboutFACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICSIMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll TopicsResearchFlagship PublicationsOther PublicationsWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF EventsCountriesIMF reports and publications by countryRegional OfficesABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific IslandsCapacity DevelopmentAbout UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and PoliciesNewsAll NewsSee AlsoFor JournalistsCountry FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interestVideosAbout the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost PopularDataIMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance StatisticsPublicationsRESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTESPublications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate Notes 
 
FACTSHEETSRESOURCESTOPICS 
 
IMF at a GlanceSurveillanceLendingCapacity DevelopmentIMF Factsheets ListIMF MembersIMF TimelineSenior OfficialsJob OpportunitiesArchives of the IMFClimate ChangeFintechFiscal PoliciesIncome InequalityAll Topics 
 
Flagship PublicationsOther Publications 
 
World Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportStaff Discussion NotesWorking PapersIMF Research PerspectivesEconomic ReviewGlobal Housing WatchCommodity PricesCommodities Data PortalIMF ResearchersAnnual Research ConferenceOther IMF Events 
 
IMF reports and publications by countryRegional Offices 
 
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVYZIMF Resident Representative OfficesIMF Regional ReportsIMF and EuropeIMF Members' Quotas and Voting Power, and Board of GovernorsIMF Regional Office for Asia and the PacificIMF Capacity Development Office in Thailand (CDOT)IMF Regional Office in Central America, Panama, and the Dominican RepublicEastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU)IMF Europe Office in Paris and BrusselsIMF Office in the Pacific Islands 
 
About UsWhat We DoHow We WorkIMF TrainingDigital Training CatalogOnline LearningOur PartnersCountry StoriesTechnical Assistance ReportsHigh-Level Summary Technical Assistance ReportsStrategy and Policies 
 
All NewsSee AlsoFor Journalists 
 
Country FocusChart of the WeekCommuniquésMission Concluding StatementsPress ReleasesSpeechesStatements at Donor MeetingsTranscriptsViews & CommentariesIMFBlogArticle IV ConsultationsFinancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)Seminars, Conferences, & Other EventsE-mail NotificationPress CenterThe IMF Press Center is a password-protected site for working journalists.LoginorRegisterInformation of interest 
 
About the IMFConferencesPress briefingsSpeechesSpecial FeaturesAfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeMiddle East and Central AsiaEconomic OutlookAnnual and spring meetingsCapacity DevelopmentMost RecentMost Popular 
 
IMF FinancesAdditional Data SourcesWorld Economic Outlook DatabasesClimate Change Indicators DashboardIMF eLibrary-DataInternational Financial StatisticsG20 Data Gaps InitiativeCurrency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange ReservesFinancial Access SurveyGovernment Finance Statistics 
 
RESOURCESFLAGSHIPSKEY SERIESIMF NOTES 
 
Publications Advanced SearchIMF eLibraryIMF BookstorePublications NewsletterEssential Reading GuidesWorld Economic OutlookGlobal Financial Stability ReportFiscal MonitorExternal Sector ReportRegional Economic ReportsCountry ReportsDepartmental PapersPolicy PapersStaff Discussion NotesSelected Issues PapersAll Staff Notes SeriesAnalytical NotesFintech NotesHow-To NotesStaff Climate Notes 
 
Finance & Development 
 
Finance & Development 
 
The Political Economy of Economic PolicyJEFFRY FRIEDENJune 2020 
 
The Political Economy of Economic PolicyJEFFRY FRIEDENJune 2020 
 
The Political Economy of Economic PolicyJEFFRY FRIEDENJune 2020 
 
The Political Economy of Economic PolicyJEFFRY FRIEDENJune 2020 
 
The Political Economy of Economic PolicyJEFFRY FRIEDENJune 2020 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文5 min(1403 words)ReadDownload PDFWe should pay closer attention to the interactions between politics, economics, and other realmsThe COVID-19 pandemic strikingly illustrates the intersection of politics,
economics, and other considerations. Public health experts have long warned
that the world was likely to face a major pandemic and called for greater
preparedness. Yet policymakers who have to focus on the next election find
it difficult to invest the time, money, and political capital to address
the abstract possibility of a future crisis. And so most of the world was
unprepared for a global public health threat of the magnitude posed by the
novel coronavirus.As the pandemic has raced across the world, the policy response has
continued to be tempered by political realities. Some members of the
public, and some policymakers, have resisted the recommendations of public
health experts, hoping for relaxed restrictions and a return to normalcy
before the dangers have passed. At the same time, business interests have
pressed for exceptions to benefit themselves, and for substantial
subsidies—bailouts—to help them through difficult times.At the international level, government responses to the pandemic illustrate
the difficult politics of worldwide cooperation. A global pandemic requires
a global response: microbes do not respect borders. A coordinated
international response is clearly the best way to confront an international
public health emergency. Yet policymakers under pressure from their
constituents have diverted resources away from other countries, banned the
export of food and drugs, and hoarded essential supplies. Each of these
measures—popular as they may be to national publics—imposes costs on other
countries. In the final analysis, the lack of cooperation makes everyone
worse off. Such international institutions as theWorld Health Organizationattempt to coordinate a cooperative global response to the global
crisis—but they can be powerless in the face of potent nationalist
political pressures (see, for example, Goodman and others 2010).Every government faces tough decisions about the appropriate measures: what
restrictions to impose and when to loosen them, where money will be spent
and how it will be raised, and what national concerns can be limited to
favor international cooperation. These decisions have to take into account
public health recommendations, economic considerations, and political
constraints. Just as the policy response to the 2007–08 financial crisis
varied from country to country in line with local political economy
conditions, so national policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic vary for
health, economic, and political reasons.Politics at playThis hotly contested policy response to a universal threat is no surprise
to political economists. It happens all the time. For example, just about
every economist believes that small countries would be better off if they
removed all barriers to trade. Yet unilateral free trade is practically
unheard of, and no country in the world today pursues it. Why not? More
generally, why do governments have so much trouble getting economic
policies right? Why does the advice of independent observers, analysts, and
scholars go so often unheeded?Politicsis the usual answer, and the answer is usually right. But that is too
vague—like saying that some countries are rich and others poor due to
economics. Exactly how does politics keep governments from making better
policy, even in the face of imminent crises? What does that tell us about
how economic policy can and should be made?Political economyis about how politics affects the economy and the economy affects politics
(see box). Governments try to pump up the economy before elections, so that
so-called political business cycles create ebbs and flows of economic
activity around elections. By the same token, economic conditions have a
powerful impact on elections. Political economists have uncovered the
simple (perhaps disturbing) fact that the rates of economic growth and
inflation are all the information we need to predict quite accurately the
results of the past 100 years of US presidential elections (see, for
example, Fair 2018). So why don’t elections work to push politicians to
choose the best policies?What Is Political Economy?Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill are widely regarded as the
originators of modern economics. But they called themselvespolitical economists, and Mill’sPrinciples of Political Economywas the fundamental text of the
discipline from its publication in 1848 until the end of the century. These
early theorists could not conceive of the economic and political worlds as
separate.Two trends divided the political from the economic analysis. First,
governments began to reduce their direct control over the economy. Second,
different political forms emerged: Europe went from almost exclusively
monarchical to increasingly representative, and highly varied, forms of
government. By the early 20th century economics and political science were
established as separate disciplines.For much of the 20th century this division reigned. With the Great
Depression and problems of development, the purely economic issues were
daunting enough to occupy economists. By the same token, the political
problems of the era—two world wars, the rise of fascism and communism—were
so serious as to require separate attention.By the 1970s, however, it was clear that the separation between the
economic and political spheres was misleading. That decade saw the collapse
of the Bretton Woods monetary order, two oil price shocks, and
stagflation—all highlighting the fact that economic and political matters
are intertwined. The economy was now high politics, and much of politics
was about the economy.Over the past 50 years, political economy has become increasingly prominent
in both economics and political science, in three ways:It analyzes how political forces affect the economy.Voters and interest groups have a powerful impact on virtually every
possible economic policy. Political economists strive to identify the
relevant groups and their interests, and how political institutions affect
their impact on policy.It assesses how the economy affects politics.Macroeconomic trends can boost or ruin an incumbent’s chances. At the more
microeconomic level, features of the economic organization or activities of
particular firms or industries can have an impact on the nature and
direction of their political activity.It uses the tools of economics to study politics.Politicians can be thought of as analogous to firms, with voters as
consumers, or governments as monopoly providers of goods and services to
constituent customers. Scholars model political-economic interactions in
order to develop a more theoretically rigorous understanding of the
underlying features driving politics.All three methods have profoundly affected both scholars and policymakers.
And political economy has a lot to offer both to analysts of how societies
work and to those who would like to change society.Where you stand depends on where you sitA basic economic principle is that any policy that is good for society as a
whole can be made to be good for everyone in society, even if the policy
creates winners and losers. It requires only that the winners be taxed just
a bit to compensate the losers—and everyone is better off. Economists use
powerful tools to clarify which economic policies are best for society. So
why should economic policy be controversial?A basicpolitical economyprinciple is that the winners don’t like
being taxed to compensate losers. And the battle is joined, not over what
is best for society but rather over who will be the winners and losers.
What is best for the country may not be best for my region, or group, or
industry, or class—and so I will fight it.Even in democracies, plenty of citizens might agree that politics obeys the
golden rule: those with the gold make the rules. Special-interest groups do
seem to play an outsize role around the world, democratic or not. These
include wealthy individuals, powerful industries, big banks and
corporations, and formidable labor unions.How else to explain why Americans pay two or three times the world price
for sugar? There are a handful of sugarcane plantations and a few thousand
sugar beet farmers in the United States—and 330 million sugar consumers.
You’d think that the 330 million would count for a lot more in politics
than the several thousand, but you’d be wrong. For decades, subsidies and
trade barriers have raised the price of sugar to the benefit of the sugar
planters and farmers and to the detriment of everyone else.Why does a tiny group of sugar producers matter more than the rest of the
country? A commonplace of political economy is thatconcentratedinterests usually win overdiffuseinterests. The sugar producers
are well organized and work hard to influence politicians. If they didn’t
get favorable government treatment they’d go out of business, so it’s
important for them to organize to lobby and fund politicians. The cost to
consumers is estimated at $2 billion to $3 billion a year. That’s a lot of
money—but it comes to a couple of cents a day for the average American. No
consumer is going to talk to an elected representative or threaten to vote
for an opponent over a couple of cents a day.The fact that producers are concentrated while consumers are diffuse helps
explain trade protection. A few automobile manufacturers can organize
themselves; tens of millions of car buyers can’t. That’s not all.
Management and labor in the auto industry may not agree on much, but
automakers and autoworkers agree that they want to be protected from
foreign competition. Politicians—especially politicians from areas where
automobile manufacturing is important—have a hard time denying a common
demand of workers and owners in a powerful industry.Perhaps this is not such a bad thing. Sugar farmers and autoworkers depend
for their livelihood on supportive policies. Who is to say that their jobs
are less important than lower prices for consumers? There is no simple,
widely accepted way to balance the benefits against the costs—is cheaper
sugar important enough to bankrupt thousands of hardworking farmers?
Politics is, in fact, the way society adjudicates among conflicting
interests, and maybe those with more at stake should have a bigger say.Political economists don’t usually take stands on complicated moral and
ethical issues of this sort. They try to understandwhysocieties
choose to do what they do. The fact that sugar or car producers have much
more at stake and are much better organized than sugar or car consumers
helps explain why government policies favor sugar and car producers over
consumers.Some consumers are concentrated, though. Sugar is sweet, and the
corporations of the Sweetener Users Association want it to be cheap as
well. Coca-Cola, Hershey, and the like have pushed hard to change American
sugar policy. The fact that there are powerful concentrated interests on
both sides of the issue helps explain why prices aren’t even higher than
they are. The same thing is true of industrial products. Steelmakers want
protection; steel users—like the auto manufacturers—don’t. Trade policy is not just a battle between big corporations and
disunited households; it’s also a battleamongbig corporations.
Otherwise we’d expect every industry to be protected and trade to be
tightly limited everywhere.In fact, there are plenty of powerful interests infavorof
international trade and investment. The world’s multinational corporations
and international banks depend on an open flow of goods and capital. This
is especially the case today, when many of the world’s largest companies
depend on complex global supply chains. A typical international corporation
today produces parts and components in dozens of countries, assembles them
in dozens more, and sells the final products everywhere. Trade barriers
interfere with these supply chains, which is why most of the world’s
biggest companies are also some of the biggest supporters of freer trade.In this 15-minute video, Prof. Jeffry Frieden responds to reader questions from around the world on political economyA complex webSpecial interests as well as voters on different sides of every issue fight
their battles in the political arena. But the rules of politics vary a lot
from country to country. The way a political economy is organized affects
who wins the battle over policy.A logical starting point is elections, at least in democracies. Governments
that don’t satisfy their constituents don’t remain governments very long.
So we might expect democracies to choose policies that benefit the economy
as a whole. However, the economy as a whole doesn’t vote.Politicians need votes from the people who decide elections. The decisive
or pivotal voters vary with a country’s electoral institutions and social
divisions. In most political systems, the best targets are swing voters,
who might change their vote in response to the policies of an incumbent or
the promises of a challenger. If the poor vote for the left and the rich
vote for the right, for example, the middle class could be decisive. In
recent American presidential elections, the most important swing voters
have been in distressed industrial regions of the Midwest. Many voters in
these areas believe that foreign competition contributed to manufacturing
decline. This helps explain why presidential candidates have become
increasingly protectionist, even though most Americans support openness to
trade.In addition, policymakers in democratic societies must always pay attention
to the next election—otherwise they are likely to cease being policymakers.
This helps explain why it can be difficult for governments to pay money now
for policies whose benefits will be realized only in the long run—such as
pandemic prevention and preparedness.The mass of special and general interests in society is overwhelming.Institutionshelp make sense of them. First aresocial institutions—the way people organize themselves. Some
businesses, farmers, and workers are well organized, giving them more
political clout. Farmers in rich countries are relatively few, are well
organized, and are almost universally subsidized and protected. Farmers in
poor countries are many, rarely organized, and almost universally taxed.
Where workers are grouped into centralized labor federations, as in some
northern European countries, they play a major role in national
policymaking. The ways in which societies organize themselves—by economic
sector, region, ethnicity—affect how they structure their politics.Political institutionsmediate the pressures constituents bring to bear on leaders. Even in
authoritarian countries, rulers have to pay attention to at least some part
of public opinion. Political economists call this the “selectorate,” that
portion of the population that matters to policymakers. In an authoritarian
regime, this could be an economic elite or the armed forces. In an
electoral democracy it would be voters and interest groups. No matter who
matters, policymakers need their support to stay in office.In democracies, the variety ofelectoral institutionsaffects how
policymakers feel constituent pressures. Organized political parties can
help extend the time horizons of politicians: while an individual
politician may worry only about the next election, a party has to be
concerned about its longer-term reputation. On another dimension, where
politicians are elected by the country as a whole, as in Israel or the
Netherlands, the focus is on national policy. Where politicians represent
narrower geographic locations, as in the US House of Representatives, the
general view is that “all politics is local” (usually attributed to
1970s–80s Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill). These different
electoral systems can drive politics toward more national or more local
concerns.Electoral institutions affect the identity of the people politicians need
to attract to win an election. The US Electoral College makes
middle-of-the-road voters in the Midwestern industrial states pivotal in
presidential elections, driving the emphasis on protection for
manufacturing. In a multiparty parliamentary system, the pivotal voters may
be the supporters of a small party that can swing back and forth between
coalition partners, such as the fringe parties for the formation of Israeli
governments. Whichever voters the electoral system makes pivotal are likely
to have outsize influence over politics and policy.The character of legislative institutionsalso matters. For
example, while a unitary parliamentary system can deliver big and fast
change, in the US separation of powers system change is more modest and
slower. Federal systems—in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, the United
States—give provincial or state governments a lot of power, while
centralized systems allow the national government to rule unchallenged.
Some governments have handed off control of important policies to
independent bodies that are less subject to day-to-day political
pressures—such as central banks and public health agencies.These institutions matter because they affect the weights that politicians
give to different groups in society. Some sociopolitical institutions give
labor unions a great deal of influence; others privilege farmers; still
others are dominated by business associations. Political economists analyze
the interests in play and how the institutions of society transmit and
transform them into government policy.Second-best can be bestAll this matters to policymakers or observers or even just people who care
about the economy because it can profoundly change the way we think about
policy and policy advice.The policy that economic analysis indicates is best for the economy may not
be politically feasible. To go back to free trade, virtually all economists
would recommend that a small country’s best bet is to remove all trade
barriers unilaterally. Yet it is almost certain that a government that
attempted to move to unilateral free trade would face massive opposition
from special interests and from many in the public who would regard such a
move as dangerous. The result might well be the collapse of the government
and its replacement with one that could be relied on to maintain and even
expand trade barriers. In this case, pursuit of the first-best policy could
lead to a much worse outcome.Politicians, analysts, observers, and just regular people who are
interested in economic policy are well advised to evaluate not only the
economic implications of policy initiatives but also their political
feasibility. If the pursuit of a first-best policy is bound to fail and
perhaps provoke a backlash, then truly the cure may be worse than the
disease. It makes more sense to consider the political realities the
government faces and to structure policy with those realities in mind. It
is better to settle for second-best than to insist on first-best and end up
worse—or, as folk wisdom has it, to let the perfect be the enemy of the
good.Bottom linePolitical economy is the integration of political and economic factors in
our analysis of modern society. Inasmuch as just about everyone would agree
that politics and economics are intricately and irretrievably
interwoven—politics affects the economy and the economy affects
politics—this approach seems natural. It has proved itself powerful inunderstandinggovernments and societies; it can also be a powerful
tool for those interested inchanginggovernments and societies.
Policymakers should hold these important lessons in mind today as they
tackle the COVID-19 pandemic.JEFFRY FRIEDENis Professor of Government at Harvard UniversityOpinions expressed in articles and other materials are those of the authors; they do not necessarily reflect IMF policy.References:Fair, Ray C. 2018. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations:
November 2018 Update.” Yale Department of Economics Paper, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.Goodman, Peter S., Katie Thomas, Sui-Lee Wee, and Jeffrey Gettleman. 2010.
“A New Front for Nationalism: The Global Battle against a Virus.”New York Times, April 10.Related FeaturesYou might also likeMarch of the ModelsThe Social Costs of PriceA Place for PoliticsGillian Tett on Anthropology for the Modern EconomistA Road Well TraveledRevisiting the Soviet BreakupF&D HOMEPAGE 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文5 min(1403 words)ReadDownload PDFWe should pay closer attention to the interactions between politics, economics, and other realmsThe COVID-19 pandemic strikingly illustrates the intersection of politics,
economics, and other considerations. Public health experts have long warned
that the world was likely to face a major pandemic and called for greater
preparedness. Yet policymakers who have to focus on the next election find
it difficult to invest the time, money, and political capital to address
the abstract possibility of a future crisis. And so most of the world was
unprepared for a global public health threat of the magnitude posed by the
novel coronavirus.As the pandemic has raced across the world, the policy response has
continued to be tempered by political realities. Some members of the
public, and some policymakers, have resisted the recommendations of public
health experts, hoping for relaxed restrictions and a return to normalcy
before the dangers have passed. At the same time, business interests have
pressed for exceptions to benefit themselves, and for substantial
subsidies—bailouts—to help them through difficult times.At the international level, government responses to the pandemic illustrate
the difficult politics of worldwide cooperation. A global pandemic requires
a global response: microbes do not respect borders. A coordinated
international response is clearly the best way to confront an international
public health emergency. Yet policymakers under pressure from their
constituents have diverted resources away from other countries, banned the
export of food and drugs, and hoarded essential supplies. Each of these
measures—popular as they may be to national publics—imposes costs on other
countries. In the final analysis, the lack of cooperation makes everyone
worse off. Such international institutions as theWorld Health Organizationattempt to coordinate a cooperative global response to the global
crisis—but they can be powerless in the face of potent nationalist
political pressures (see, for example, Goodman and others 2010).Every government faces tough decisions about the appropriate measures: what
restrictions to impose and when to loosen them, where money will be spent
and how it will be raised, and what national concerns can be limited to
favor international cooperation. These decisions have to take into account
public health recommendations, economic considerations, and political
constraints. Just as the policy response to the 2007–08 financial crisis
varied from country to country in line with local political economy
conditions, so national policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic vary for
health, economic, and political reasons.Politics at playThis hotly contested policy response to a universal threat is no surprise
to political economists. It happens all the time. For example, just about
every economist believes that small countries would be better off if they
removed all barriers to trade. Yet unilateral free trade is practically
unheard of, and no country in the world today pursues it. Why not? More
generally, why do governments have so much trouble getting economic
policies right? Why does the advice of independent observers, analysts, and
scholars go so often unheeded?Politicsis the usual answer, and the answer is usually right. But that is too
vague—like saying that some countries are rich and others poor due to
economics. Exactly how does politics keep governments from making better
policy, even in the face of imminent crises? What does that tell us about
how economic policy can and should be made?Political economyis about how politics affects the economy and the economy affects politics
(see box). Governments try to pump up the economy before elections, so that
so-called political business cycles create ebbs and flows of economic
activity around elections. By the same token, economic conditions have a
powerful impact on elections. Political economists have uncovered the
simple (perhaps disturbing) fact that the rates of economic growth and
inflation are all the information we need to predict quite accurately the
results of the past 100 years of US presidential elections (see, for
example, Fair 2018). So why don’t elections work to push politicians to
choose the best policies?What Is Political Economy?Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill are widely regarded as the
originators of modern economics. But they called themselvespolitical economists, and Mill’sPrinciples of Political Economywas the fundamental text of the
discipline from its publication in 1848 until the end of the century. These
early theorists could not conceive of the economic and political worlds as
separate.Two trends divided the political from the economic analysis. First,
governments began to reduce their direct control over the economy. Second,
different political forms emerged: Europe went from almost exclusively
monarchical to increasingly representative, and highly varied, forms of
government. By the early 20th century economics and political science were
established as separate disciplines.For much of the 20th century this division reigned. With the Great
Depression and problems of development, the purely economic issues were
daunting enough to occupy economists. By the same token, the political
problems of the era—two world wars, the rise of fascism and communism—were
so serious as to require separate attention.By the 1970s, however, it was clear that the separation between the
economic and political spheres was misleading. That decade saw the collapse
of the Bretton Woods monetary order, two oil price shocks, and
stagflation—all highlighting the fact that economic and political matters
are intertwined. The economy was now high politics, and much of politics
was about the economy.Over the past 50 years, political economy has become increasingly prominent
in both economics and political science, in three ways:It analyzes how political forces affect the economy.Voters and interest groups have a powerful impact on virtually every
possible economic policy. Political economists strive to identify the
relevant groups and their interests, and how political institutions affect
their impact on policy.It assesses how the economy affects politics.Macroeconomic trends can boost or ruin an incumbent’s chances. At the more
microeconomic level, features of the economic organization or activities of
particular firms or industries can have an impact on the nature and
direction of their political activity.It uses the tools of economics to study politics.Politicians can be thought of as analogous to firms, with voters as
consumers, or governments as monopoly providers of goods and services to
constituent customers. Scholars model political-economic interactions in
order to develop a more theoretically rigorous understanding of the
underlying features driving politics.All three methods have profoundly affected both scholars and policymakers.
And political economy has a lot to offer both to analysts of how societies
work and to those who would like to change society.Where you stand depends on where you sitA basic economic principle is that any policy that is good for society as a
whole can be made to be good for everyone in society, even if the policy
creates winners and losers. It requires only that the winners be taxed just
a bit to compensate the losers—and everyone is better off. Economists use
powerful tools to clarify which economic policies are best for society. So
why should economic policy be controversial?A basicpolitical economyprinciple is that the winners don’t like
being taxed to compensate losers. And the battle is joined, not over what
is best for society but rather over who will be the winners and losers.
What is best for the country may not be best for my region, or group, or
industry, or class—and so I will fight it.Even in democracies, plenty of citizens might agree that politics obeys the
golden rule: those with the gold make the rules. Special-interest groups do
seem to play an outsize role around the world, democratic or not. These
include wealthy individuals, powerful industries, big banks and
corporations, and formidable labor unions.How else to explain why Americans pay two or three times the world price
for sugar? There are a handful of sugarcane plantations and a few thousand
sugar beet farmers in the United States—and 330 million sugar consumers.
You’d think that the 330 million would count for a lot more in politics
than the several thousand, but you’d be wrong. For decades, subsidies and
trade barriers have raised the price of sugar to the benefit of the sugar
planters and farmers and to the detriment of everyone else.Why does a tiny group of sugar producers matter more than the rest of the
country? A commonplace of political economy is thatconcentratedinterests usually win overdiffuseinterests. The sugar producers
are well organized and work hard to influence politicians. If they didn’t
get favorable government treatment they’d go out of business, so it’s
important for them to organize to lobby and fund politicians. The cost to
consumers is estimated at $2 billion to $3 billion a year. That’s a lot of
money—but it comes to a couple of cents a day for the average American. No
consumer is going to talk to an elected representative or threaten to vote
for an opponent over a couple of cents a day.The fact that producers are concentrated while consumers are diffuse helps
explain trade protection. A few automobile manufacturers can organize
themselves; tens of millions of car buyers can’t. That’s not all.
Management and labor in the auto industry may not agree on much, but
automakers and autoworkers agree that they want to be protected from
foreign competition. Politicians—especially politicians from areas where
automobile manufacturing is important—have a hard time denying a common
demand of workers and owners in a powerful industry.Perhaps this is not such a bad thing. Sugar farmers and autoworkers depend
for their livelihood on supportive policies. Who is to say that their jobs
are less important than lower prices for consumers? There is no simple,
widely accepted way to balance the benefits against the costs—is cheaper
sugar important enough to bankrupt thousands of hardworking farmers?
Politics is, in fact, the way society adjudicates among conflicting
interests, and maybe those with more at stake should have a bigger say.Political economists don’t usually take stands on complicated moral and
ethical issues of this sort. They try to understandwhysocieties
choose to do what they do. The fact that sugar or car producers have much
more at stake and are much better organized than sugar or car consumers
helps explain why government policies favor sugar and car producers over
consumers.Some consumers are concentrated, though. Sugar is sweet, and the
corporations of the Sweetener Users Association want it to be cheap as
well. Coca-Cola, Hershey, and the like have pushed hard to change American
sugar policy. The fact that there are powerful concentrated interests on
both sides of the issue helps explain why prices aren’t even higher than
they are. The same thing is true of industrial products. Steelmakers want
protection; steel users—like the auto manufacturers—don’t. Trade policy is not just a battle between big corporations and
disunited households; it’s also a battleamongbig corporations.
Otherwise we’d expect every industry to be protected and trade to be
tightly limited everywhere.In fact, there are plenty of powerful interests infavorof
international trade and investment. The world’s multinational corporations
and international banks depend on an open flow of goods and capital. This
is especially the case today, when many of the world’s largest companies
depend on complex global supply chains. A typical international corporation
today produces parts and components in dozens of countries, assembles them
in dozens more, and sells the final products everywhere. Trade barriers
interfere with these supply chains, which is why most of the world’s
biggest companies are also some of the biggest supporters of freer trade.In this 15-minute video, Prof. Jeffry Frieden responds to reader questions from around the world on political economyA complex webSpecial interests as well as voters on different sides of every issue fight
their battles in the political arena. But the rules of politics vary a lot
from country to country. The way a political economy is organized affects
who wins the battle over policy.A logical starting point is elections, at least in democracies. Governments
that don’t satisfy their constituents don’t remain governments very long.
So we might expect democracies to choose policies that benefit the economy
as a whole. However, the economy as a whole doesn’t vote.Politicians need votes from the people who decide elections. The decisive
or pivotal voters vary with a country’s electoral institutions and social
divisions. In most political systems, the best targets are swing voters,
who might change their vote in response to the policies of an incumbent or
the promises of a challenger. If the poor vote for the left and the rich
vote for the right, for example, the middle class could be decisive. In
recent American presidential elections, the most important swing voters
have been in distressed industrial regions of the Midwest. Many voters in
these areas believe that foreign competition contributed to manufacturing
decline. This helps explain why presidential candidates have become
increasingly protectionist, even though most Americans support openness to
trade.In addition, policymakers in democratic societies must always pay attention
to the next election—otherwise they are likely to cease being policymakers.
This helps explain why it can be difficult for governments to pay money now
for policies whose benefits will be realized only in the long run—such as
pandemic prevention and preparedness.The mass of special and general interests in society is overwhelming.Institutionshelp make sense of them. First aresocial institutions—the way people organize themselves. Some
businesses, farmers, and workers are well organized, giving them more
political clout. Farmers in rich countries are relatively few, are well
organized, and are almost universally subsidized and protected. Farmers in
poor countries are many, rarely organized, and almost universally taxed.
Where workers are grouped into centralized labor federations, as in some
northern European countries, they play a major role in national
policymaking. The ways in which societies organize themselves—by economic
sector, region, ethnicity—affect how they structure their politics.Political institutionsmediate the pressures constituents bring to bear on leaders. Even in
authoritarian countries, rulers have to pay attention to at least some part
of public opinion. Political economists call this the “selectorate,” that
portion of the population that matters to policymakers. In an authoritarian
regime, this could be an economic elite or the armed forces. In an
electoral democracy it would be voters and interest groups. No matter who
matters, policymakers need their support to stay in office.In democracies, the variety ofelectoral institutionsaffects how
policymakers feel constituent pressures. Organized political parties can
help extend the time horizons of politicians: while an individual
politician may worry only about the next election, a party has to be
concerned about its longer-term reputation. On another dimension, where
politicians are elected by the country as a whole, as in Israel or the
Netherlands, the focus is on national policy. Where politicians represent
narrower geographic locations, as in the US House of Representatives, the
general view is that “all politics is local” (usually attributed to
1970s–80s Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill). These different
electoral systems can drive politics toward more national or more local
concerns.Electoral institutions affect the identity of the people politicians need
to attract to win an election. The US Electoral College makes
middle-of-the-road voters in the Midwestern industrial states pivotal in
presidential elections, driving the emphasis on protection for
manufacturing. In a multiparty parliamentary system, the pivotal voters may
be the supporters of a small party that can swing back and forth between
coalition partners, such as the fringe parties for the formation of Israeli
governments. Whichever voters the electoral system makes pivotal are likely
to have outsize influence over politics and policy.The character of legislative institutionsalso matters. For
example, while a unitary parliamentary system can deliver big and fast
change, in the US separation of powers system change is more modest and
slower. Federal systems—in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, the United
States—give provincial or state governments a lot of power, while
centralized systems allow the national government to rule unchallenged.
Some governments have handed off control of important policies to
independent bodies that are less subject to day-to-day political
pressures—such as central banks and public health agencies.These institutions matter because they affect the weights that politicians
give to different groups in society. Some sociopolitical institutions give
labor unions a great deal of influence; others privilege farmers; still
others are dominated by business associations. Political economists analyze
the interests in play and how the institutions of society transmit and
transform them into government policy.Second-best can be bestAll this matters to policymakers or observers or even just people who care
about the economy because it can profoundly change the way we think about
policy and policy advice.The policy that economic analysis indicates is best for the economy may not
be politically feasible. To go back to free trade, virtually all economists
would recommend that a small country’s best bet is to remove all trade
barriers unilaterally. Yet it is almost certain that a government that
attempted to move to unilateral free trade would face massive opposition
from special interests and from many in the public who would regard such a
move as dangerous. The result might well be the collapse of the government
and its replacement with one that could be relied on to maintain and even
expand trade barriers. In this case, pursuit of the first-best policy could
lead to a much worse outcome.Politicians, analysts, observers, and just regular people who are
interested in economic policy are well advised to evaluate not only the
economic implications of policy initiatives but also their political
feasibility. If the pursuit of a first-best policy is bound to fail and
perhaps provoke a backlash, then truly the cure may be worse than the
disease. It makes more sense to consider the political realities the
government faces and to structure policy with those realities in mind. It
is better to settle for second-best than to insist on first-best and end up
worse—or, as folk wisdom has it, to let the perfect be the enemy of the
good.Bottom linePolitical economy is the integration of political and economic factors in
our analysis of modern society. Inasmuch as just about everyone would agree
that politics and economics are intricately and irretrievably
interwoven—politics affects the economy and the economy affects
politics—this approach seems natural. It has proved itself powerful inunderstandinggovernments and societies; it can also be a powerful
tool for those interested inchanginggovernments and societies.
Policymakers should hold these important lessons in mind today as they
tackle the COVID-19 pandemic.JEFFRY FRIEDENis Professor of Government at Harvard UniversityOpinions expressed in articles and other materials are those of the authors; they do not necessarily reflect IMF policy.References:Fair, Ray C. 2018. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations:
November 2018 Update.” Yale Department of Economics Paper, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.Goodman, Peter S., Katie Thomas, Sui-Lee Wee, and Jeffrey Gettleman. 2010.
“A New Front for Nationalism: The Global Battle against a Virus.”New York Times, April 10. 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
العربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
5 min(1403 words)ReadDownload PDFWe should pay closer attention to the interactions between politics, economics, and other realmsThe COVID-19 pandemic strikingly illustrates the intersection of politics,
economics, and other considerations. Public health experts have long warned
that the world was likely to face a major pandemic and called for greater
preparedness. Yet policymakers who have to focus on the next election find
it difficult to invest the time, money, and political capital to address
the abstract possibility of a future crisis. And so most of the world was
unprepared for a global public health threat of the magnitude posed by the
novel coronavirus.As the pandemic has raced across the world, the policy response has
continued to be tempered by political realities. Some members of the
public, and some policymakers, have resisted the recommendations of public
health experts, hoping for relaxed restrictions and a return to normalcy
before the dangers have passed. At the same time, business interests have
pressed for exceptions to benefit themselves, and for substantial
subsidies—bailouts—to help them through difficult times.At the international level, government responses to the pandemic illustrate
the difficult politics of worldwide cooperation. A global pandemic requires
a global response: microbes do not respect borders. A coordinated
international response is clearly the best way to confront an international
public health emergency. Yet policymakers under pressure from their
constituents have diverted resources away from other countries, banned the
export of food and drugs, and hoarded essential supplies. Each of these
measures—popular as they may be to national publics—imposes costs on other
countries. In the final analysis, the lack of cooperation makes everyone
worse off. Such international institutions as theWorld Health Organizationattempt to coordinate a cooperative global response to the global
crisis—but they can be powerless in the face of potent nationalist
political pressures (see, for example, Goodman and others 2010).Every government faces tough decisions about the appropriate measures: what
restrictions to impose and when to loosen them, where money will be spent
and how it will be raised, and what national concerns can be limited to
favor international cooperation. These decisions have to take into account
public health recommendations, economic considerations, and political
constraints. Just as the policy response to the 2007–08 financial crisis
varied from country to country in line with local political economy
conditions, so national policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic vary for
health, economic, and political reasons.Politics at playThis hotly contested policy response to a universal threat is no surprise
to political economists. It happens all the time. For example, just about
every economist believes that small countries would be better off if they
removed all barriers to trade. Yet unilateral free trade is practically
unheard of, and no country in the world today pursues it. Why not? More
generally, why do governments have so much trouble getting economic
policies right? Why does the advice of independent observers, analysts, and
scholars go so often unheeded?Politicsis the usual answer, and the answer is usually right. But that is too
vague—like saying that some countries are rich and others poor due to
economics. Exactly how does politics keep governments from making better
policy, even in the face of imminent crises? What does that tell us about
how economic policy can and should be made?Political economyis about how politics affects the economy and the economy affects politics
(see box). Governments try to pump up the economy before elections, so that
so-called political business cycles create ebbs and flows of economic
activity around elections. By the same token, economic conditions have a
powerful impact on elections. Political economists have uncovered the
simple (perhaps disturbing) fact that the rates of economic growth and
inflation are all the information we need to predict quite accurately the
results of the past 100 years of US presidential elections (see, for
example, Fair 2018). So why don’t elections work to push politicians to
choose the best policies?What Is Political Economy?Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill are widely regarded as the
originators of modern economics. But they called themselvespolitical economists, and Mill’sPrinciples of Political Economywas the fundamental text of the
discipline from its publication in 1848 until the end of the century. These
early theorists could not conceive of the economic and political worlds as
separate.Two trends divided the political from the economic analysis. First,
governments began to reduce their direct control over the economy. Second,
different political forms emerged: Europe went from almost exclusively
monarchical to increasingly representative, and highly varied, forms of
government. By the early 20th century economics and political science were
established as separate disciplines.For much of the 20th century this division reigned. With the Great
Depression and problems of development, the purely economic issues were
daunting enough to occupy economists. By the same token, the political
problems of the era—two world wars, the rise of fascism and communism—were
so serious as to require separate attention.By the 1970s, however, it was clear that the separation between the
economic and political spheres was misleading. That decade saw the collapse
of the Bretton Woods monetary order, two oil price shocks, and
stagflation—all highlighting the fact that economic and political matters
are intertwined. The economy was now high politics, and much of politics
was about the economy.Over the past 50 years, political economy has become increasingly prominent
in both economics and political science, in three ways:It analyzes how political forces affect the economy.Voters and interest groups have a powerful impact on virtually every
possible economic policy. Political economists strive to identify the
relevant groups and their interests, and how political institutions affect
their impact on policy.It assesses how the economy affects politics.Macroeconomic trends can boost or ruin an incumbent’s chances. At the more
microeconomic level, features of the economic organization or activities of
particular firms or industries can have an impact on the nature and
direction of their political activity.It uses the tools of economics to study politics.Politicians can be thought of as analogous to firms, with voters as
consumers, or governments as monopoly providers of goods and services to
constituent customers. Scholars model political-economic interactions in
order to develop a more theoretically rigorous understanding of the
underlying features driving politics.All three methods have profoundly affected both scholars and policymakers.
And political economy has a lot to offer both to analysts of how societies
work and to those who would like to change society.Where you stand depends on where you sitA basic economic principle is that any policy that is good for society as a
whole can be made to be good for everyone in society, even if the policy
creates winners and losers. It requires only that the winners be taxed just
a bit to compensate the losers—and everyone is better off. Economists use
powerful tools to clarify which economic policies are best for society. So
why should economic policy be controversial?A basicpolitical economyprinciple is that the winners don’t like
being taxed to compensate losers. And the battle is joined, not over what
is best for society but rather over who will be the winners and losers.
What is best for the country may not be best for my region, or group, or
industry, or class—and so I will fight it.Even in democracies, plenty of citizens might agree that politics obeys the
golden rule: those with the gold make the rules. Special-interest groups do
seem to play an outsize role around the world, democratic or not. These
include wealthy individuals, powerful industries, big banks and
corporations, and formidable labor unions.How else to explain why Americans pay two or three times the world price
for sugar? There are a handful of sugarcane plantations and a few thousand
sugar beet farmers in the United States—and 330 million sugar consumers.
You’d think that the 330 million would count for a lot more in politics
than the several thousand, but you’d be wrong. For decades, subsidies and
trade barriers have raised the price of sugar to the benefit of the sugar
planters and farmers and to the detriment of everyone else.Why does a tiny group of sugar producers matter more than the rest of the
country? A commonplace of political economy is thatconcentratedinterests usually win overdiffuseinterests. The sugar producers
are well organized and work hard to influence politicians. If they didn’t
get favorable government treatment they’d go out of business, so it’s
important for them to organize to lobby and fund politicians. The cost to
consumers is estimated at $2 billion to $3 billion a year. That’s a lot of
money—but it comes to a couple of cents a day for the average American. No
consumer is going to talk to an elected representative or threaten to vote
for an opponent over a couple of cents a day.The fact that producers are concentrated while consumers are diffuse helps
explain trade protection. A few automobile manufacturers can organize
themselves; tens of millions of car buyers can’t. That’s not all.
Management and labor in the auto industry may not agree on much, but
automakers and autoworkers agree that they want to be protected from
foreign competition. Politicians—especially politicians from areas where
automobile manufacturing is important—have a hard time denying a common
demand of workers and owners in a powerful industry.Perhaps this is not such a bad thing. Sugar farmers and autoworkers depend
for their livelihood on supportive policies. Who is to say that their jobs
are less important than lower prices for consumers? There is no simple,
widely accepted way to balance the benefits against the costs—is cheaper
sugar important enough to bankrupt thousands of hardworking farmers?
Politics is, in fact, the way society adjudicates among conflicting
interests, and maybe those with more at stake should have a bigger say.Political economists don’t usually take stands on complicated moral and
ethical issues of this sort. They try to understandwhysocieties
choose to do what they do. The fact that sugar or car producers have much
more at stake and are much better organized than sugar or car consumers
helps explain why government policies favor sugar and car producers over
consumers.Some consumers are concentrated, though. Sugar is sweet, and the
corporations of the Sweetener Users Association want it to be cheap as
well. Coca-Cola, Hershey, and the like have pushed hard to change American
sugar policy. The fact that there are powerful concentrated interests on
both sides of the issue helps explain why prices aren’t even higher than
they are. The same thing is true of industrial products. Steelmakers want
protection; steel users—like the auto manufacturers—don’t. Trade policy is not just a battle between big corporations and
disunited households; it’s also a battleamongbig corporations.
Otherwise we’d expect every industry to be protected and trade to be
tightly limited everywhere.In fact, there are plenty of powerful interests infavorof
international trade and investment. The world’s multinational corporations
and international banks depend on an open flow of goods and capital. This
is especially the case today, when many of the world’s largest companies
depend on complex global supply chains. A typical international corporation
today produces parts and components in dozens of countries, assembles them
in dozens more, and sells the final products everywhere. Trade barriers
interfere with these supply chains, which is why most of the world’s
biggest companies are also some of the biggest supporters of freer trade.In this 15-minute video, Prof. Jeffry Frieden responds to reader questions from around the world on political economyA complex webSpecial interests as well as voters on different sides of every issue fight
their battles in the political arena. But the rules of politics vary a lot
from country to country. The way a political economy is organized affects
who wins the battle over policy.A logical starting point is elections, at least in democracies. Governments
that don’t satisfy their constituents don’t remain governments very long.
So we might expect democracies to choose policies that benefit the economy
as a whole. However, the economy as a whole doesn’t vote.Politicians need votes from the people who decide elections. The decisive
or pivotal voters vary with a country’s electoral institutions and social
divisions. In most political systems, the best targets are swing voters,
who might change their vote in response to the policies of an incumbent or
the promises of a challenger. If the poor vote for the left and the rich
vote for the right, for example, the middle class could be decisive. In
recent American presidential elections, the most important swing voters
have been in distressed industrial regions of the Midwest. Many voters in
these areas believe that foreign competition contributed to manufacturing
decline. This helps explain why presidential candidates have become
increasingly protectionist, even though most Americans support openness to
trade.In addition, policymakers in democratic societies must always pay attention
to the next election—otherwise they are likely to cease being policymakers.
This helps explain why it can be difficult for governments to pay money now
for policies whose benefits will be realized only in the long run—such as
pandemic prevention and preparedness.The mass of special and general interests in society is overwhelming.Institutionshelp make sense of them. First aresocial institutions—the way people organize themselves. Some
businesses, farmers, and workers are well organized, giving them more
political clout. Farmers in rich countries are relatively few, are well
organized, and are almost universally subsidized and protected. Farmers in
poor countries are many, rarely organized, and almost universally taxed.
Where workers are grouped into centralized labor federations, as in some
northern European countries, they play a major role in national
policymaking. The ways in which societies organize themselves—by economic
sector, region, ethnicity—affect how they structure their politics.Political institutionsmediate the pressures constituents bring to bear on leaders. Even in
authoritarian countries, rulers have to pay attention to at least some part
of public opinion. Political economists call this the “selectorate,” that
portion of the population that matters to policymakers. In an authoritarian
regime, this could be an economic elite or the armed forces. In an
electoral democracy it would be voters and interest groups. No matter who
matters, policymakers need their support to stay in office.In democracies, the variety ofelectoral institutionsaffects how
policymakers feel constituent pressures. Organized political parties can
help extend the time horizons of politicians: while an individual
politician may worry only about the next election, a party has to be
concerned about its longer-term reputation. On another dimension, where
politicians are elected by the country as a whole, as in Israel or the
Netherlands, the focus is on national policy. Where politicians represent
narrower geographic locations, as in the US House of Representatives, the
general view is that “all politics is local” (usually attributed to
1970s–80s Democratic Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill). These different
electoral systems can drive politics toward more national or more local
concerns.Electoral institutions affect the identity of the people politicians need
to attract to win an election. The US Electoral College makes
middle-of-the-road voters in the Midwestern industrial states pivotal in
presidential elections, driving the emphasis on protection for
manufacturing. In a multiparty parliamentary system, the pivotal voters may
be the supporters of a small party that can swing back and forth between
coalition partners, such as the fringe parties for the formation of Israeli
governments. Whichever voters the electoral system makes pivotal are likely
to have outsize influence over politics and policy.The character of legislative institutionsalso matters. For
example, while a unitary parliamentary system can deliver big and fast
change, in the US separation of powers system change is more modest and
slower. Federal systems—in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, the United
States—give provincial or state governments a lot of power, while
centralized systems allow the national government to rule unchallenged.
Some governments have handed off control of important policies to
independent bodies that are less subject to day-to-day political
pressures—such as central banks and public health agencies.These institutions matter because they affect the weights that politicians
give to different groups in society. Some sociopolitical institutions give
labor unions a great deal of influence; others privilege farmers; still
others are dominated by business associations. Political economists analyze
the interests in play and how the institutions of society transmit and
transform them into government policy.Second-best can be bestAll this matters to policymakers or observers or even just people who care
about the economy because it can profoundly change the way we think about
policy and policy advice.The policy that economic analysis indicates is best for the economy may not
be politically feasible. To go back to free trade, virtually all economists
would recommend that a small country’s best bet is to remove all trade
barriers unilaterally. Yet it is almost certain that a government that
attempted to move to unilateral free trade would face massive opposition
from special interests and from many in the public who would regard such a
move as dangerous. The result might well be the collapse of the government
and its replacement with one that could be relied on to maintain and even
expand trade barriers. In this case, pursuit of the first-best policy could
lead to a much worse outcome.Politicians, analysts, observers, and just regular people who are
interested in economic policy are well advised to evaluate not only the
economic implications of policy initiatives but also their political
feasibility. If the pursuit of a first-best policy is bound to fail and
perhaps provoke a backlash, then truly the cure may be worse than the
disease. It makes more sense to consider the political realities the
government faces and to structure policy with those realities in mind. It
is better to settle for second-best than to insist on first-best and end up
worse—or, as folk wisdom has it, to let the perfect be the enemy of the
good.Bottom linePolitical economy is the integration of political and economic factors in
our analysis of modern society. Inasmuch as just about everyone would agree
that politics and economics are intricately and irretrievably
interwoven—politics affects the economy and the economy affects
politics—this approach seems natural. It has proved itself powerful inunderstandinggovernments and societies; it can also be a powerful
tool for those interested inchanginggovernments and societies.
Policymakers should hold these important lessons in mind today as they
tackle the COVID-19 pandemic.JEFFRY FRIEDENis Professor of Government at Harvard UniversityOpinions expressed in articles and other materials are those of the authors; they do not necessarily reflect IMF policy.References:Fair, Ray C. 2018. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations:
November 2018 Update.” Yale Department of Economics Paper, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.Goodman, Peter S., Katie Thomas, Sui-Lee Wee, and Jeffrey Gettleman. 2010.
“A New Front for Nationalism: The Global Battle against a Virus.”New York Times, April 10. 
 
5 min(1403 words)Read 
 
What Is Political Economy?Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill are widely regarded as the
originators of modern economics. But they called themselvespolitical economists, and Mill’sPrinciples of Political Economywas the fundamental text of the
discipline from its publication in 1848 until the end of the century. These
early theorists could not conceive of the economic and political worlds as
separate.Two trends divided the political from the economic analysis. First,
governments began to reduce their direct control over the economy. Second,
different political forms emerged: Europe went from almost exclusively
monarchical to increasingly representative, and highly varied, forms of
government. By the early 20th century economics and political science were
established as separate disciplines.For much of the 20th century this division reigned. With the Great
Depression and problems of development, the purely economic issues were
daunting enough to occupy economists. By the same token, the political
problems of the era—two world wars, the rise of fascism and communism—were
so serious as to require separate attention.By the 1970s, however, it was clear that the separation between the
economic and political spheres was misleading. That decade saw the collapse
of the Bretton Woods monetary order, two oil price shocks, and
stagflation—all highlighting the fact that economic and political matters
are intertwined. The economy was now high politics, and much of politics
was about the economy.Over the past 50 years, political economy has become increasingly prominent
in both economics and political science, in three ways:It analyzes how political forces affect the economy.Voters and interest groups have a powerful impact on virtually every
possible economic policy. Political economists strive to identify the
relevant groups and their interests, and how political institutions affect
their impact on policy.It assesses how the economy affects politics.Macroeconomic trends can boost or ruin an incumbent’s chances. At the more
microeconomic level, features of the economic organization or activities of
particular firms or industries can have an impact on the nature and
direction of their political activity.It uses the tools of economics to study politics.Politicians can be thought of as analogous to firms, with voters as
consumers, or governments as monopoly providers of goods and services to
constituent customers. Scholars model political-economic interactions in
order to develop a more theoretically rigorous understanding of the
underlying features driving politics.All three methods have profoundly affected both scholars and policymakers.
And political economy has a lot to offer both to analysts of how societies
work and to those who would like to change society. 
 
JEFFRY FRIEDENis Professor of Government at Harvard University 
 
References:Fair, Ray C. 2018. “Presidential and Congressional Vote-Share Equations:
November 2018 Update.” Yale Department of Economics Paper, Yale University,
New Haven, CT.Goodman, Peter S., Katie Thomas, Sui-Lee Wee, and Jeffrey Gettleman. 2010.
“A New Front for Nationalism: The Global Battle against a Virus.”New York Times, April 10. 
 
Related FeaturesYou might also likeMarch of the ModelsThe Social Costs of PriceA Place for PoliticsGillian Tett on Anthropology for the Modern EconomistA Road Well TraveledRevisiting the Soviet BreakupF&D HOMEPAGE 
 
Related Features 
 
Latest IssuesMarch 2024Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文December 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文September 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文June 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文More 
 
Latest Issues 
 
March 2024Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文December 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文September 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文June 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
March 2024Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
March 2024Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
العربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
December 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
December 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
العربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
September 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
September 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
العربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
June 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
June 2023Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
Englishالعربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
العربيةespañolfrançais日本語русский中文 
 
More 
 
More 
 
About UsAbout F&D MagazineContact UsSocial MediaF&D on FacebookF&D on LinkedInF&D STAFFGita Bhatt, Editor-In-ChiefMaureen Burke,  Managing EditorPeter J. Walker, Senior EditorJeff Kearns, Senior EditorNicholas Owen, Senior EditorSmita Aggarwal, Assistant EditorAndrew Stanley, Assistant EditorBruce Edwards, Multimedia ContentNoha Elbadawy, Multimedia contentMelinda Weir,  Production ManagerRekia Ennaboulssi, Web ManagerMarta Doroszczyk, Digital MarketingKwabena Akuamoah-Boateng, Social Media Editor 
 
About UsAbout F&D MagazineContact Us 
 
Social MediaF&D on FacebookF&D on LinkedIn 
 
F&D STAFFGita Bhatt, Editor-In-ChiefMaureen Burke,  Managing EditorPeter J. Walker, Senior EditorJeff Kearns, Senior EditorNicholas Owen, Senior EditorSmita Aggarwal, Assistant Editor 
 
Andrew Stanley, Assistant EditorBruce Edwards, Multimedia ContentNoha Elbadawy, Multimedia contentMelinda Weir,  Production ManagerRekia Ennaboulssi, Web ManagerMarta Doroszczyk, Digital MarketingKwabena Akuamoah-Boateng, Social Media Editor 
 
AboutResearchCountriesCapacity DevelopmentNewsEventsVideosDataPublicationsSocial Media HubAnnual ReportCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyContact UsCareersGlossaryScam AlertIMF Brandعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol© International Monetary Fund. All rights reserved. 
 
AboutResearchCountriesCapacity DevelopmentNewsEventsVideosDataPublicationsSocial Media HubAnnual ReportCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyContact UsCareersGlossaryScam AlertIMF Brandعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
 
AboutResearchCountriesCapacity DevelopmentNewsEventsVideosDataPublicationsSocial Media HubAnnual ReportCopyright and UsagePrivacy PolicyContact UsCareersGlossaryScam AlertIMF Brandعربي中文Français日本語РусскийEspañol 
 
© International Monetary Fund. All rights reserved. 
 
© International Monetary Fund. All rights reserved. 
